# 1. A Tour of Computer Systems

Source program (file) e.g. hello.c
*text file* sequence of bytes, ASCII characters

**All information in a system - including disk files, programs stored in memory, user data stored in memory and data transferred across a network - is represented as a bunch of bits** Only distinguished by the context in which we view them. 

translated into executable object program (binary disk file). 4 phases - preprocessor -> compiler -> Assembler -> linker (known as compilation system)

* Pre-processing phase. modifies original program according directives that begin with '#'. result another Program with suffix .i
* Compilation phase. translates the text file hello.i into text file hello.s. assembly-language program. useful because it provides a common output language for different compilers. definition of fuction *main*
* Assembly phase.  .s translated into machine language, relocatable object program. .o suffix, would appear as jibberish
* Linking phase. merges functions contained in the standard C library

1.3 It pays to understand how compilation works

* Optimizing performance
* Understanding link-time errors
* Avoiding security holes

1.4

**buses** carry bytes back and forth between components. designed to transfer fixed size chunks, known as *words*

**I/O devices** connection to external world eg. mouse & keyboard

**Main Memory** holds the program and the data it manipulates.(DRAM)

**Processor** the engine that interprets (executes) instructions stored in main memory. contains *program counter* (PC) - a word-size storage unit that points at some machine language instruction in the main memory. *arithmetic/logic unit* (ALU) computes new data and address values.

simple operations a processor might carry out
* Load - Copy byte or word from main memory into registerå, overwriting contents
* Store - Copy from register to location in main memory overwriting contents
* Operate - copy the contents of 2 ALU registers to perform arithmetic operation.
* Jump - extract a word from the instruction itself and copy word into program counter, overwritng previous value of the PC. 

1.5 Caches Matter
* Lots of moving information from one place to another.
* Larger memory storage the longer it takes to access.
* caches temporary staging areas for likely need information
* SRAM - static random access memory

 1.6 Storage devices form a heirachy
* smaller faster storage device at the top (cache memory)
* larger slower devices at bottom (main memory)

1.7 Operating system manages hardware

Operating system layer of software between hardware and appliaction program

purposes
1. protect hardware.
2. provide applications with simple and mechanisms for manipulating the complicated, often wildly different low level hardware devices. 

Fundemental abstractions *processes, virtual memory, and files*

**Processes**
abstraction for running a program

concurrently - instructions of one process are interleaved with anothe process. 

CPU can appear to execute multiple processes simutaneously -> *context switching*

*threads* 

**Virtual Memory**

provides each process with the illusion that it has exclusive use of the main memory *virtual address space*

virtual address space areas: 
* program code and data
* Heap
* shared libraries
* stack
* kernel virtual memory

**File**
sequence of bytes
all input and output done by reading and writing files.

1.8 systems communicate with other systems using networks

network can be viewed as another i/0 device

1.9 Important themes

**Amdahl's Law**

Even though we made a substantial improvement to a major part of the system, our net speedup was significantly less than the speedup for the one part.

1.9.2 concurrency and parallelism

concurrency -> multiple simultaneous activities
parallelism -> using concurrency to make system run faster

Thread Level concurrency 
 
